Documentation overhaul (#266)
nix-community/nix-doom-emacs: docs/faq.md

```nix
programs.doom-emacs = {
  # ...
  emacsPackagesOverlay = self: super: {
    idris2-mode = self.trivialBuild {
      pname = "idris2-mode";
      ename = "idris2-mode";
      version = "0.0.0";
      src = pkgs.fetchFromGitHub {
        owner = "idris-community";
        repo = "idris2-mode";
        rev = "4a3f9cdb1a155da59824e39f0ac78ccf72f2ca97";
        sha256 = "sha256-TxsGaG2fBRWWP9aas59kiNnUVD4ZdNlwwaFbM4+n81c=";
      };
    };
  }
};
```

This will error with (this is a part of the build log):

```
In toplevel form:
idris2-hole-list.el:27:2: Error: Cannot open load file: No such file or directory, prop-menu

In toplevel form:
idris2-info.el:29:2: Error: Cannot open load file: No such file or directory, prop-menu

In idris2-ipkg-pkgs-flags-for-current-buffer:
idris2-ipkg-mode.el:372:2: Warning: docstring wider than 80 characters

In toplevel form:
idris2-mode.el:20:2: Error: Cannot open load file: No such file or directory, prop-menu

In idris2-prover-end:
idris2-prover.el:378:2: Warning: docstring wider than 80 characters

In toplevel form:
idris2-repl.el:29:2: Error: Cannot open load file: No such file or directory, prop-menu
```

> The way to fix it is by just adding the dependency it's complaining about.

Reviewer: Not sure if this section is really useful. This package did complain very loudly about its missing dependency, but this is not always true. Also in general, I think debugging dependency builds is like debugging issues with any other Nix derivation, that I think we should assume the user from NDE already have.

Reviewer: If you do want to keep this section here, I think it is better to explain the basics of debugging in Nix. For example, showing the `nix log` command to get the full logs of a failed build.

Reviewer 2: I think having the basics of debugging in nix would be perfect for this section. It won't really be a "nix tutorial", but just a couple references to external pages that might explain how debugging in nix works, or just listing a few helpful commands to read the documentation. Thanks.

## How do I enable the service?

There aren't many complications about this. If you use the Home-Manager module, it's simply `services.emacs.enable = true;`. The Home-Manager module will do the rest for you.

> But if you're not, and you're using a standalone method, you'll need:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using NixOS instead, you'll need:
```

```nix
services.emacs = {
  enable = true;

>   package = inputs.doom-emacs.packages.${system}.doom-emacs;

Reviewer: I think most people would be more interesting on having their own custom version, so:
```suggestion
  package = inputs.doom-emacs.packages.${system}.doom-emacs.override {
    doomPrivateDir = ./doom;
  };
```

};
```

You can now run `emacsclient -c` to connect to the daemon.

> ## What is `trivialBuild`?

Reviewer: If you're going this route, I think it is better to document the 4 main builders for Emacs:
- [generic](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/emacs/generic.nix)
- [trivialBuild](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/emacs/trivial.nix)
- [elpaBuild](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/emacs/elpa.nix)
- [melpaBuild](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/emacs/melpa.nix)

I think `elpaBuild` and `melpaBuild` are pretty much self-explanatory, but maybe giving an example of each builder is good.

BTW, yeah, this looks like something that should be in `nixpkgs` itself. Sadly it is not. Maybe opening an issue in `nixpkgs` and pinging the Emacs maintainers so they can document those builders :thinking: ?

Reviewer 2: Alright! I've opened https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/190746. Do you think we should wait until it's documented in the Nixpkgs manual?

Reviewer: To merge? Probably not.

We can always update the docs later once the documentation is generated.

# FAQ

> This is more meant as a "Fully Anticipated Questions" than a "Frequently Asked Questions", as they're anticipated as common pitfalls to using NDE.

Reviewer: We should have a question that is something like this (rough draft, please improve):

> I am new to Nix. Is this the only way to use doom-emacs with Nix/NixOS?
> No, you can just follow the instructions from doom-emacs website and get a working doom-emacs setup.
> hlissner (the creator of doom-emacs) uses [NixOS](https://github.com/hlissner/dotfiles) and uses a ["normal", imperative setup](https://github.com/hlissner/dotfiles/blob/master/modules/editors/emacs.nix). So should you!

# FAQ
This is more meant as a "Fully Anticipated Questions" than a "Frequently Asked Questions", as they're anticipated as common pitfalls to using NDE.

## I am new to Nix. Is this the only way to use Doom Emacs with Nix/NixOS?

Nope! Doom Emacs is still perfectly usable imperatively. In fact, the very author of Doom Emacs uses NixOS and install Doom Emacs with an ["imperative" setup](https://github.com/hlissner/dotfiles/blob/master/modules/editors/emacs.nix). You could just follow the instructions on the [Doom Emacs GitHub repository](https://github.com/doomemacs/doomemacs) to get a working setup.

## OK, I put your snippets into my NixOS configuration, and I put my Doom Emacs configuration as well. How do I `doom sync`?

> To update your Doom Emacs config, you simply run `nixos-rebuild switch` (or `home-manager switch` if you use Home-Manager standalone). Nix-Doom-Emacs will do everything else for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To update your Doom Emacs config, simply trigger a rebuild. For example, in NixOS you can use `nixos-rebuild switch`, while if you're using Home-Manager standalone you can use `home-manager switch`. Nix-Doom-Emacs will do everything else for you.
```

## How do I install my favourite package?

> You should use the `emacsPackagesOverlay` attribute. Here's an example that installs `magit-delta` which depends on Git:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should use the `emacsPackagesOverlay` attribute. Here's an example that installs `magit-delta`, which depends on Git:
```

```nix
programs.doom-emacs = {
  # ...
  emacsPackagesOverlay = self: super: {
    magit-delta = super.magit-delta.overrideAttrs (esuper: {
      buildInputs = esuper.buildInputs ++ [ pkgs.git ];
    });
  }
};
```

### But what if my package is from a Git source, and isn't on ELPA?

> This requires a few more lines, but it isn't by any means difficult. For an example, this installs `idris2-mode` which isn't on ELPA, but is hosted on GitHub:

Reviewer 3: Also, isn't an FAQ supposed to be flat? `##` it and remove the context from the last section - people will be scanning for the relevant part, not reading it all linearly.

> This requires a few more lines, but it isn't by any means difficult. For an example, this installs `idris2-mode` which isn't on ELPA, but is hosted on GitHub:

Reviewer 2: what do i need to do here? i've never had that error personally, does it just happen if the package doesn't exist or something?

```nix
programs.doom-emacs = {
  # ...
  emacsPackagesOverlay = self: super: {
    idris2-mode = self.trivialBuild {
      pname = "idris2-mode";
      ename = "idris2-mode";

>       version = "0.0.0";

Reviewer 2: There is no real version, really. The first and final release was in 2021 for some sort of IDE protocol.

>       version = "0.0.0";

Reviewer: `unstable-YYYY-MM-DD`?

      buildInputs = [ self.prop-menu ];
      src = pkgs.fetchFromGitHub {
        owner = "idris-community";
        repo = "idris2-mode";
        rev = "4a3f9cdb1a155da59824e39f0ac78ccf72f2ca97";
        sha256 = "sha256-TxsGaG2fBRWWP9aas59kiNnUVD4ZdNlwwaFbM4+n81c=";
      };
    };
  }
};
```

> ### Help! My favourite package doesn't work after adding it in!

Reviewer 3: "doesn't work after adding it in" is extremely generic and yet this addresses a specific issue that's already been mentioned before a bit. Maybe drop this whole question? It's kind of implied by the user having knowledge of Nix I think. I'm not sure about our scope though.

## How do I enable the service?

There aren't many complications about this. If you use the Home-Manager module, it's simply `services.emacs.enable = true;`. The Home-Manager module will do the rest for you.

If you're not, and you're using a standalone method (NixOS only without home-manager/nix-darwin) instead, you'll need:

```nix
services.emacs = {
  enable = true;
  package = inputs.doom-emacs.packages.${system}.doom-emacs.override {
    doomPrivateDir = ./doom;
  };
};
```

You can now run `emacsclient -c` to connect to the daemon.

## What is `trivialBuild`?

Though beyond the scope of this document, [`trivialBuild`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/emacs/trivial.nix) is a Nixpkgs function to trivially build Emacs packages. You can use it to build e.g. local packages or packages hosted on Git repositories. It is not a nix-doom-emacs tool. It's also in a family of functions in Nixpkgs which are made to build Emacs packages. Such as:

[`generic`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/emacs/generic.nix): This is the "base" function which all the other build functions are derived from.

> [`elpaBuild`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/emacs/elpa.nix), and [`melpaBuild`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/build-support/emacs/elpa.nix): Those are self-explanatory. To find examples of how they're used, you'll unfortunately have to [search Nixpkgs](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/search) for them. Luckily, the way they're used in Nixpkgs is very simple.

Reviewer 3: Reference material. Reference material. Very much belongs in `docs/reference.md`. I think the casual style is okay but it makes no sense to have it under an FAQ.

> For what it's worth, this will not be the last time you muddle around in the Nixpkgs code to understand how to use something. The NixOS project is known to have very bad documentation, and unfortunately the code may be your only way to understand some things.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps true, but out of scope and screams [NPOV](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Neutral_point_of_view). The matrix chat is a better place to reflect with people about this silly lil' ecosystem.

(Basically, if we keep this we're obliged to also review what documentation does exist and you kind of did that earlier but a full review is even more out of scope)

Reviewer 3: (Maybe you should write a blog though. I think there's a lot of people who would like this kind of ADHD-ey-I-think writing and I might also like it, though probably not on this subject since I've had enough nix-doom-emacs the past few months for basically forever. Alas.)

> ## Help! nix-doom-emacs isn't working if I set DOOMDIR or EMACSDIR

Reviewer 3: Help! Help! Help! Help! Help! Help! Help! Help! (^:
```suggestion
## nix-doom-emacs isn't working if I set DOOMDIR or EMACSDIR
```

> You shouldn't do that. The only thing that nix-doom-emacs writes in your $HOME is `~/.emacs.d/init.el`, which points to the Nix store. Make sure to remove them from your configuration, then reboot after rebuilding it. If for just the session, you can just `unset` those 2 variables.

Reviewer 3: The _HM module_ does that. And there's a chance you do have a valid reason to set it. Blog material perhaps.

> ## Help! on MacOS, it says "Too many files open"!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## I'm on MacOS and it says "Too many files open"!
```

> Running `ulimit -S -n 2048` will fix it for the duration of your shell session.

Reviewer 3: And a permanent solution? On NixOS there's [security.pam.loginLimits](https://github.com/ckiee/nixfiles/blob/a046c6969867133b01d9b62a6db27acbaab523a0/default.nix#L30-L36). Maybe don't limit to MacOS though I think NixOS' defaults are higher.

Reviewer: Almost sure that this is only an issue in macOS. NixOS and most distros have a saner ulimit by default.

Reviewer: Removing the reference for NixOS since it uses a much higher ulimit by default.

> ## How do I use emacs-overlay's emacs with nix-doom-emacs?

Reviewer 3: Umm isn't that the default? 
Also:
```suggestion
## How can I use a custom Emacs derivation?
```

Reviewer 3: Smells a bit reference too, maybe move or duplicate in a option listing style thing explaining each argument.

> This is very simple. you just use the `emacsPackage` attribute after applying `emacs-overlay` to your Nixpkgs. something like:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use the `emacsPackage` attribute after applying `emacs-overlay` to your Nixpkgs:
```

```nix
programs.doom-emacs =   {
  enable = true;
  doomPrivateDir = ./doom;

>   emacsPackage = pkgs.emacsPgtkNativeComp; # I used the native comp pgtk as an example

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  emacsPackage = pkgs.emacsPgtkNativeComp;
```

}

> ```

Reviewer 3: Add another example for non-HM or something like that.

| readme                  | reference                           | faq            |
|           ---           |                ---                  |     ---        |
| [README.md](/README.md) | [docs/reference.md](./reference.md)| this document  |

> # FAQ
> This is more meant as a "Fully Anticipated Questions" than a "Frequently Asked Questions", as they're anticipated as common pitfalls to using NDE.

Reviewer 3: "more meant as"? Icky grammar. And perhaps, shorten:
```suggestion
# Frequently Asked Questions
Or, *Fully Anticipated Questions*
```

## I am new to Nix. Is this the only way to use Doom Emacs with Nix/NixOS?

> Nope! Doom Emacs is still perfectly usable imperatively. In fact, the very author of Doom Emacs uses NixOS and install Doom Emacs with an ["imperative" setup](https://github.com/hlissner/dotfiles/blob/master/modules/editors/emacs.nix). You could just follow the instructions on the [Doom Emacs GitHub repository](https://github.com/doomemacs/doomemacs) to get a working setup.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Nope! Doom Emacs is still perfectly usable imperatively. In fact, the very author of Doom Emacs uses NixOS and install Doom Emacs with an [imperative setup](https://github.com/hlissner/dotfiles/blob/master/modules/editors/emacs.nix). You can follow the instructions on the [Doom Emacs GitHub repository](https://github.com/doomemacs/doomemacs) to get a working setup.
```

## OK, I put your snippets into my NixOS configuration, and I put my Doom Emacs configuration as well. How do I `doom sync`?

To update your Doom Emacs config, you simply rebuild your configuration. For example, in NixOS you can use `nixos-rebuild switch` (or `home-manager switch` if you use Home-Manager standalone). nix-doom-emacs will do everything else for you.

In an imperative environment, Doom updates can break Emacs with no easy way to roll back.

> nix-doom-emacs moves the moving parts of your Emacs installation into the Nix build sandbox.

Reviewer 3: A more correct answer would be:
> There's no `doom sync` equivalent. It just doesn't do the same thing. We build an Emacs with your Doom configuration embedded in it. `doom sync` just updates packages.

Feels like you wrote the answer before the question. Bad format? Wrong question? Maybe it shouldn't be a question. Reference material? The FAQ-Reference separation feels a bit cheesy/premature.

Maybe a reference documenting all the options and a `usage.md` documenting the pitfalls, basically this FAQ renamed, allowing for a not-so-strict format. Take the user through a tour but don't feel so forced to make everything a question. Keep the plentiful headings for easy scanning.

> ## How do I add a native dependency to a package's build?

Reviewer 3: How do I get to realizing that's what I need to do? How would I know this is the question I want to ask?

This is the question you need if your Doom configuration errors with `Package not available`. `nix-straight.el` assumes that packages are on emacs-overlay's packages, which only include (M)ELPA. This question assumes the package uses GitHub, so it uses the `fetchFromGitHub` function. To see which function you'd need to use, you should look at [the Nixpkgs manual's fetchers section](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#chap-pkgs-fetchers)
This requires a few more lines, but it isn't by any means difficult. For an example, this installs `idris2-mode` which isn't on (M)ELPA, but is hosted on GitHub:

```nix
programs.doom-emacs = {
  # ...
  emacsPackagesOverlay = self: super: {
    idris2-mode = self.trivialBuild {
      pname = "idris2-mode";
      ename = "idris2-mode";
      version = "0.0.0";
      buildInputs = [ self.prop-menu ];
      src = pkgs.fetchFromGitHub {
        owner = "idris-community";
        repo = "idris2-mode";
        rev = "4a3f9cdb1a155da59824e39f0ac78ccf72f2ca97";
        sha256 = "sha256-TxsGaG2fBRWWP9aas59kiNnUVD4ZdNlwwaFbM4+n81c=";
      };
    };
  }
};
```

## nix-doom-emacs isn't working if I set DOOMDIR or EMACSDIR

> You shouldn't do that. nix-doom-emacs' home-manager module only writes `~/.emacs.d/init.el` in your `$HOME`, which points to the Nix store. Make sure to remove the environment variables from your configuration, then reboot after rebuilding it. If for just the session, you can just `unset` those 2 variables.

Reviewer 3: I think this is the bad formatting striking again. Same problems with the title and the `init.el` part isn't true if you're using Emacs 29. (unreleased, git)

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by "the bad formatting"? I think this should be in the FAQ, not the reference, if that's what you mean. I can't fit it into the reference and this makes some semblance of sense staying here, in my opinion.
